Add draft for static jumps (#4200)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-4200.md

---
eip: 4200
title: Static relative jumps
description: RJUMP and RJUMPI instructions with a signed immediate encoding the jump destination
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Andrei Maiboroda (@gumb0), Paweł Bylica (@chfast)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3920-static-relative-jumps/7108
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-07-16
requires: 3540, 3670
---

## Abstract

Two new EVM jump instructions are introduced (`RJUMP` and `RJUMPI`) which encode the destination as a signed immediate value. These can be useful in the majority of (but not all) use cases and offer a cost reduction.

## Motivation

> A recurring discussion topic is that EVM only has mechanism for dynamic jumps. They provide a very flexible architecture with only 2 (!) instructions. This flexibility comes at a cost however: it makes analysis of code more complicated and it also (partially) resulted in the need to have the `JUMPDEST` marker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A recurring discussion topic is that EVM only has a mechanism for dynamic jumps. They provide a very flexible architecture with only 2 instructions. This flexibility comes at a cost however: it makes analysis of code more complicated and it also (partially) resulted in the need to have the `JUMPDEST` marker.
```

> In great many cases control flow is actually static and there is no need for any dynamic behaviour, though not every use case can be solved by them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a great many cases control flow is actually static and there is no need for any dynamic behaviour, though not every use case can be solved by static jumps.
```

There are various ways to reduce the need for dynamic jumps, some examples:
1. With native support for functions / subroutines
2. A "return to caller" instruction
3. A "switch-case" table with dynamic indexing

> We are not attempting to solve these, but decided to only introduce a minimal feature set to allow compilers to decide which is the most adequate option for a given use case. We expect they would use `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI` almost exclusively, with the exception of returning to the caller would keep using `JUMP`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change does not attempt to solve these, but instead introduce a minimal feature set to allow compilers to decide which is the most adequate option for a given use case. It is expected that compilers will use `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI` almost exclusively, with the exception of returning to the caller continuing to use `JUMP`.
```

> This functionality does not preclude the EVM from introducing other forms of control flow later on. In fact we think `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI` can efficiently co-exists with a higher-level declaration of functions, where static relative jumps should be used for intra-function control flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This functionality does not preclude the EVM from introducing other forms of control flow later on. `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI` can efficiently co-exists with a higher-level declaration of functions, where static relative jumps should be used for intra-function control flow.
```

> The main resulting benefit of these instruction is reduced gas cost (both at deploy and execution time) and better analysis properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main benefit of these instruction is reduced gas cost (both at deploy and execution time) and better analysis properties.
```

## Specification

We introduce two new instructions on the same block number [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md) is activated on:
1. `RJUMP` (0x5c)
2. `RJUMPI` (0x5d)

If the code is legacy bytecode, both of these instructions result in an *exceptional halt*. (*Note: This means no change to behaviour.*)

> > TODO: Should we ignore what happens in the legacy case, or it is nicer being explicit as above?
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Recommend being explicit, like you have here.

If the code is valid EOF1:
1. `RJUMP relative_offset` (0x5c), sets the `PC` to `PC_post_instruction + relative_offset`.
2. `RJUMPI relative_offset` (0x5d), pops a value (`condition`) from the stack, and sets the `PC` to `PC_post_instruction + ((condition == 0) ? 0 : relative_offset)`.

The immediate argument `relative_offset` is encoded as a 16-bit **signed** (twos-complement) big-endian value. Under `PC_post_instruction` we mean the `PC` position after the entire immediate value.

We also extend the validation algorithm of [EIP-3670](./eip-3670.md) to verify that each `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI` has a `relative_offset` pointing to an instruction. This means it cannot point to an immediate data of `PUSHn`/`RJUMP`/`RJUMPI`. It is allowed to point to a `JUMPDEST`, but is not required to.

Because the destinations are validated upfront, the cost of these instructions are less than their dynamic counterparts: `RJUMP` should cost 6, and `RJUMPI` should cost 8. This is a reduction of 2 gas, compared to `JUMP` and `JUMPI`.

## Rationale

### Relative addressing

> We chose relative addressing in order to support code which is moveable. This also means it can be injected. A technique used by Optimism's validator was to inject code like `PUSHn PC ADD JUMPI` to get around this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose relative addressing in order to support code which is moveable. This also means it can be injected. A technique seen used prior to this EIP to achieve this same goal was to inject code like `PUSHn PC ADD JUMPI`.
```
Recommend remaining neutral and not mentioning specific dapps when possible (avoids people thinking you are advertising).
